There is an ongoing need for volunteers
at Bethel and on theocratic
construction projects.
Are you interested in serving in these ways?
If so, we encourage you to watch the video
Making Yourself Available for Bethel Service,
which can be found on jw.org.
In addition, pioneers
between the ages of 23 and 65
who are interested
in expanding their ministry
are invited to contact
their congregation secretary
and fill in the online application to attend
the School for Kingdom Evangelizers.
How can we maintain our faith
during these difficult
last days of this system of things?
We learn many lessons
from a time remarkably similar to ours.
Please follow along in your Bible
as Brother Anthony Morris
of the Governing Body
introduces and applies
the dramatic Bible reading entitled
“Noah—Faith Moved Him to Obey.”
Three days before Jesus was put to death,
his disciples posed a question
that has great importance
for all of us today.
They asked Jesus:
“What will be the sign of your presence
and of the conclusion
of the system of things?”
In reply, Jesus foretold that a time period
preceding the promised new world
would be marked by events such as wars,
earthquakes, food shortages,
and pestilence.
Jesus then said:
“For as they were in those days
“before the Flood,
“eating and drinking,
“men marrying
“and women being given in marriage,
“until the day that Noah entered into the ark,
“and they took no note
“until the Flood came
“and swept them all away,
so the presence of the Son of man will be.”
With those words,
Jesus confirmed
that Noah was a real person
and that the Flood
was an actual, historical event.
He also warned us
that the period just before the Flood
mirrors the period in which we live today.
So it’s important to consider closely
what happened in Noah’s day
and to see what we can learn from it.
The opening chapters of the book of Genesis
give us a picture of what life was like
in the centuries prior to Noah
—after Adam and Eve were expelled
from the garden of Eden.
Everyone spoke the same language,
and people had possibly
developed the art of writing.
They had built a city, maybe several cities.
They had learned
how to forge copper and iron.
They made musical instruments
—harps and flutes.
And because they were much closer
to the physical perfection of Adam and Eve,
they lived long lives
—hundreds of years.
But all was not well.
People turned away from Jehovah
and, as a result,
they became very violent and immoral.
Things got so bad
that Jehovah moved
a righteous man named Enoch,
the seventh man
in the genealogical line from Adam,
to prophesy that God
would not forever tolerate
a wicked and rebellious world;
he’d execute judgment against the ungodly.
Of course,
the ungodly people in Enoch’s day
didn’t like what he was saying.
They hated Enoch,
and they may have tried to kill him.
Enoch never saw the fulfillment
of this prophecy.
Another 600 years passed,
and by then conditions on earth
had become even worse.
Let’s read Genesis 6:1-7:
“Now when men started to grow in number
“on the surface of the ground
“and daughters were born to them,
“the sons of the true God began to notice
“that the daughters of men were beautiful.
“So they began taking as wives all whom they chose.
“Then Jehovah said:
“‘My spirit will not tolerate man indefinitely,
“‘because he is only flesh.
“Accordingly, his days will amount to 120 years.’
“The Nephilim were on the earth
“in those days and afterward.
“During that time the sons of the true God
“continued to have relations with the daughters of men,
“and these bore sons to them.
“They were the mighty ones of old times,
“the men of fame.
“Consequently, Jehovah saw that man’s wickedness
“was great on the earth
“and that every inclination of the thoughts of his heart
“was only bad all the time.
“Jehovah regretted that he had made men on the earth,
“and his heart was saddened.
“So Jehovah said:
“‘I am going to wipe men whom I have created
“‘off the surface of the ground,
“‘man together with domestic animals,
“‘creeping animals,
“‘and flying creatures of the heavens,
for I regret that I have made them.’”
During that time,
some angels from heaven
noticed beautiful human women
and developed lustful feelings for them.
These angels rebelled against God
by coming to earth and taking on human bodies
in order to have sex with the women.
They became selfish, wicked demons.
They may have been charming,
intelligent, handsome,
and they had supernatural powers.
They must have been irresistible,
especially to women
who themselves had no love of God.
Perhaps the angels took some women by force.
Whatever the case,
the angels took “all whom they chose.”
What human on earth at that time
could hope to stop demons?
To these godless creatures,
people lost their daughters,
their sisters,
and possibly even their wives.
The women became pregnant
and gave birth to sons,
but their sons were not like other boys.
They were stronger.
They were bullies
—aggressive, fierce, and brutal.
Those qualities stayed with them
as they grew.
The boys became men,
but they were unusually cruel.
They were called Nephilim,
possibly meaning
“those who cause others to fall down,”
and people feared them.
Like their fathers,
the Nephilim had no love for God,
and they cared only about their fame
for being strong and vicious.
The materialized angels
and their savage offspring
dominated the world of that time,
and people followed their lead.
Jehovah saw
that man’s wickedness was rampant
“and that every inclination
of the thoughts of his heart
was only bad all the time.”
How Satan must have delighted
to see most humans reject Jehovah
and become more and more corrupt!
But in that world of depraved people,
there was a man who was faithful to Jehovah.
Let’s read about him at Genesis 6:8:
“But Noah found favor in the eyes of Jehovah.
“This is the history of Noah.
“Noah was a righteous man.
“He proved himself faultless among his contemporaries.
“Noah walked with the true God.
“In time Noah became father to three sons,
“Shem, Ham, and Japheth.
“But the earth had become ruined
“in the sight of the true God,
“and the earth was filled with violence.
“Yes, God looked upon the earth,
“and it was ruined;
all flesh had ruined its way on the earth.”
Some people today say
that there was no such person as Noah
and that the account
of the ark and the Flood
are just a legend or a fairy tale.
But the Bible writer knew
that Noah really existed
and that the Flood truly happened.
The prophets Isaiah and Ezekiel
both refer to Noah.
Ezra, the writer of First Chronicles,
and the Gospel writer Luke
both include Noah
in the chronologies they compiled.
The apostles Peter and Paul both confirm
the Genesis account of the Flood.
And, as we mentioned earlier,
the Son of God himself testified
that Noah was a real person
and that the Flood really happened.
Noah’s faith was outstanding.
He lived in an evil world
—a world dominated
by materialized angels,
their violent offspring,
and a society of ungodly people.
Noah lacked
many of the things we have today
to help us keep our faith strong.
He had no Bible to help him
to love Jehovah
and to understand his ways.
He didn’t know
about all the faithful men and women
who would live after him.
And Noah had no congregation
of fellow believers
to encourage him
and to strengthen his faith.
Yet, Noah knew much.
He knew what happened in the garden of Eden,
and he could see the tragic results.
He saw that people grew old and died.
He knew that the way
to the garden of Eden was barred
and the ground outside had been cursed.
He understood
what his great-grandfather Enoch
had foretold.
And Noah knew that his father, Lamech,
had given him a name
likely meaning “rest” or “consolation”
because he would, as his father foretold,
“bring us comfort from our labor
“and from the painful toil of our hands
because of the ground
that Jehovah has cursed.”
Surely, Noah wondered about these prophecies.
How would he bring comfort?
How and when would God act
against the wicked ones who surrounded him?
For hundreds of years,
Noah prayed and he wondered.
By the time he had lived well over 500 years,
he had married and had a family
—three sons.
Though he lived in a wicked world,
Noah remained faithful to God,
and he helped his family to do the same.
Then Jehovah delivered a message
that surely must have stunned Noah.
Let’s continue reading from Genesis 6:13:
“After that God said to Noah:
“‘I have decided to put an end to all flesh,
“‘because the earth is full of violence on account of them,
“‘so I am bringing them to ruin together with the earth.
‘‘‘Make for yourself an ark from resinous wood.
“‘You will make compartments in the ark
“‘and cover it with tar inside and outside.
“‘This is how you will make it:
“‘The ark should be 300 cubits long,
“‘50 cubits wide, and 30 cubits high.
“‘You will make a window for light for the ark,
“‘one cubit from the top.
“‘You should put the entrance of the ark in its side
“‘and make it with a lower deck,
“‘a second deck, and a third deck.
“‘As for me, I am going to bring
“‘floodwaters upon the earth
“‘to destroy from under the heavens
“‘all flesh that has the breath of life.
“‘Everything on the earth will perish.
“‘And I am establishing my covenant with you,
“‘and you must go into the ark,
“‘you, your sons, your wife,
“‘and your sons’ wives with you.
“‘And bring into the ark
“‘two of every sort of living creature
“‘in order to preserve them alive with you,
“‘a male and a female;
“‘of the flying creatures according to their kinds,
“‘the domestic animals according to their kinds,
“‘and all creeping animals of the ground
“‘according to their kinds,
“‘two of each will go in there to you
“‘to preserve them alive.
“‘For your part,
“‘you are to collect and take with you
“‘every kind of food to eat,
“to serve as food for you and for the animals.’
“And Noah did according to all
“that God had commanded him.
He did just so.”
Noah had long wondered
how Jehovah would act
against an ungodly world.
Now he knew;
a catastrophic flood would cleanse the earth.
Noah also knew
what he and his family must do.
So much depended on him!
The thought must have been overwhelming.
The ark would be gigantic.
Now new questions occupied his mind.
Trees, a great many trees,
would have to be felled
and the timber hauled, shaped, and joined.
How would he do that?
How would he gather so many kinds of animals?
How would he get food supplies
for the animals and for his family?
And what about the godless people around him?
What would they think?
Noah knew what had happened
to the righteous men who preceded him.
Abel had been killed by his brother Cain.
And Enoch likely was
in such danger of being slain
by ungodly ones
that God mercifully cut his life short
so that he wouldn’t fall into their hands.
People would see
what he was doing,
and they’d soon learn why he was doing it.
These God-dishonoring,
Nephilim-influenced people
might react violently.
Yet, Noah trusted in Jehovah,
and he got to work.
He did all that God had commanded him.
It took a long time
for Noah’s family to build the ark,
perhaps some 40 or 50 years.
There must have been challenges,
but we never read that Noah complained.
The family had no support from others.
Remember that Jesus said that the people
“took no note until the Flood came
and swept them all away.”
Of course, people took note
that Noah was building an ark.
His neighbors must have asked him
why he was building
such an enormous structure.
And Noah explained to them
why he was building it.
But Noah’s contemporaries took no note
that Jehovah was blessing Noah
and his construction efforts.
They took no note
of what this would mean for them.
Instead, the people
were caught up in everyday affairs
—eating, drinking, and marrying;
those were the things that concerned them.
To those godless people,
Noah and his family were fools
—crackpots.
They were the butt of ridicule, jeers,
and probably threats.
The ark was finally completed.
We can imagine Noah and his family
looking at it with pride
and remembering how God had helped them.
Jehovah always directs
his servants when needed.
Now Jehovah spoke again to Noah.
Let’s read chapter 7, starting with verse 1:
“After that Jehovah said to Noah:
“‘Go into the ark,
“‘you and all your household,
“‘because you are the one I have found
“‘to be righteous before me among this generation.
“‘You must take with you
“‘every kind of clean animal by sevens,
“‘the male and its mate;
“‘and of every animal that is not clean just two,
“‘also of the flying creatures of the sky by sevens,
“‘male and female,
“‘to preserve their offspring alive over all the earth.
“‘For in just seven days,
“‘I will make it rain on the earth
“‘for 40 days and 40 nights,
“‘and I will wipe from the surface of the ground
“every living thing that I have made.’
“Then Noah did everything
that Jehovah had commanded him.”
There was no time to lose.
There was urgent work to do.
In seven days, the rains would come.
Animals, many animals,
had to be situated in the ark.
Supplies had to be secured.
Noah listened, and he obeyed.
For the second time in this inspired account,
we are told that Noah did all
that he was commanded to do.
Now please turn to Genesis 7:6:
“Noah was 600 years old
“when the floodwaters came upon the earth.
“So Noah, along with his sons,
“his wife, and his sons’ wives,
“went into the ark ahead of the floodwaters.
“Of every clean animal
“and of every animal that is not clean
“and of the flying creatures
“and of everything that moves on the ground,
“they went inside the ark to Noah by twos,
“male and female,
“just as God had commanded Noah.
“And seven days later
“the floodwaters came upon the earth.
“In the 600th year of Noah’s life,
“in the second month,
“on the 17th day of the month,
“on that day all the springs
“of the vast watery deep burst open
“and the floodgates of the heavens were opened.
“And the rain poured down on the earth
“for 40 days and 40 nights.
“On that very day,
“Noah went into the ark along with his sons,
“Shem, Ham, and Japheth,
“and his wife and the three wives of his sons.
“They went in with every wild animal
“according to its kind,
“and every domestic animal according to its kind,
“and every creeping animal of the earth
“according to its kind,
“and every flying creature according to its kind,
“every bird, every winged creature.
“They kept going to Noah inside the ark,
“two by two,
“of every sort of flesh that has the breath of life.
“So they went in,
“male and female of every sort of flesh,
“just as God had commanded him.
“After that Jehovah shut the door behind him.
“The flooding continued for 40 days on the earth,
“and the waters kept increasing
“and began carrying the ark,
“and it was floating high above the earth.
“The waters became overwhelming
“and kept increasing greatly upon the earth,
“but the ark floated on the surface of the waters.
“The waters overwhelmed the earth so greatly
“that all the tall mountains
“under the whole heavens were covered.
“The waters rose up to 15 cubits
“above the mountains.
“So all living creatures
“that were moving on the earth perished
“—the flying creatures, the domestic animals,
“the wild animals, the swarming creatures,
“and all mankind.
“Everything on dry land
“that had the breath of life in its nostrils died.
“So He wiped every living thing
“from the surface of the earth,
“including man, animals, creeping animals,
“and the flying creatures of the sky.
“They were all wiped off the earth;
“only Noah and those with him in the ark survived.
“And the waters continued overwhelming the earth
for 150 days.”
If Noah had wondered
how he would collect all those animals,
he now knew.
They would come to him.
Jehovah would bring them.
Noah didn’t have to go looking for them.
The animals did come
—every kind of animal,
some by sevens and some by twos.
Just imagine dozens and dozens of animals
strutting, hopping, slithering,
and waddling into the ark!
We can imagine Noah’s family
finding places for them all,
stroking the soft fur
of some animals as they passed
while avoiding
the rough hides or spines of others
and making sure to get out of the way
of the large animals as they lumbered past.
The birds came too
—fluttering, soaring.
What colors!
What smells!
What sounds!
Noah and his family must have shouted
to hear one another above the din.
When all were inside, Jehovah shut the door.
Can you picture the family
huddling together inside the ark
—listening, straining to hear?
Then it came.
Rain!
Perhaps it began almost imperceptibly,
but soon it came in torrents.
The sound was deafening.
What they had long anticipated
was now happening!
They were tired, exhausted,
but there was likely little sleep that night.
There were animals to check.
There was the din of the rain.
And how they prayed!
Did their thoughts turn to those outside?
Certainly.
They knew those people
and had preached to them.
Many were relatives.
How sad for them!
Like Jehovah,
Noah took no delight
in the death of the wicked.
It saddened him that so many had to die,
but he knew that those who perished
had ample warning of what was to come.
Even if they hadn’t seen
the ark Noah was building,
they would have heard about it.
They’d know why he was building it.
Now it was too late for them.
Jehovah had shut the door.
Noah’s family listened as the rain
battered the ark without letup.
And then came a moment
they would never forget
—movement!
They felt their massive wooden ark
lifting from the ground.
It was floating!
Their hearts were beating loud and fast.
Would their vessel hold together?
Let’s resume our reading
from Genesis 8:1
to see what happened next.
“But God gave attention to Noah
“and to all the wild animals and domestic animals
“that were with him in the ark,
“and God caused a wind to blow over the earth,
“and the waters began to subside.
“The springs of the watery deep
“and the floodgates of the heavens were stopped up,
“so the rain from the heavens stopped falling.
“Then the waters began
“to recede progressively from the earth.
“By the end of 150 days,
“the waters had subsided.
“In the seventh month,
“on the 17th day of the month,
“the ark came to rest on the mountains of Ararat.
“And the waters were steadily decreasing
“until the tenth month.
“In the tenth month, on the first of the month,
“the tops of the mountains appeared.
“So at the end of 40 days,
“Noah opened the window that he had made in the ark
“and sent out a raven;
“it continued flying outside and returning,
“until the waters dried off the earth.
“Later he sent out a dove
“to see whether the waters had receded
“from the surface of the ground.
“The dove did not find any resting-place to perch,
“so it returned to him into the ark
“because the waters were still covering
“the surface of the whole earth.
“So he reached his hand out
“and brought it inside the ark.
“He waited seven more days,
“and once again he sent out the dove from the ark.
“When the dove came to him toward evening,
“he saw that there was
“a freshly plucked olive leaf in its bill!
“So Noah knew that the waters
“had receded from the earth.
“He waited still another seven days.
“Then he sent out the dove,
but it did not return to him anymore.”
For 40 days and 40 nights,
the noise of torrential rain filled the ark,
and then it stopped.
Imagine Noah
and his family peering out of the ark
and seeing nothing but water,
no land anywhere.
A wind blew, and the waters subsided.
Finally, 150 days after the downpour began,
the ark settled on land.
What a happy day that must have been!
Was it safe to go out?
No.
The waters had to subside further.
There was plenty to do
to keep the family busy.
There were animals to feed and to care for.
Still, Noah’s family
must have longed to be outside,
to be free of the confinement,
to feel the ground under their feet.
Patience was needed.
Picture the family spending time together,
planning what they’d do
when they came out of the ark.
Another 73 days passed.
Now they could see the tops of the mountains.
Now was it safe to exit?
Noah peered out of a window.
He selected from the birds a raven,
and he sent it out, but it kept returning.
Noah put the raven back in its place
and selected a dove.
It too flew and returned,
not having found a place to perch.
A week later, he released it again,
and it returned
with an olive leaf in its bill.
Seven days later, Noah sent it again.
This time it did not return.
What next?
Let’s continue reading
from chapter 8, verse 13:
“Now in the 601st year, in the first month,
“on the first day of the month,
“the waters had drained from the earth;
“and Noah removed the covering of the ark
“and saw that the surface of the ground was drying.
“In the second month,
“on the 27th day of the month,
“the earth had dried off.
“God now said to Noah:
“‘Go out of the ark, you, your wife,
“‘your sons, and your sons’ wives.
“‘Bring out with you all the living creatures
“‘of every sort of flesh,
“‘of the flying creatures and of the animals
“‘and of all the creeping animals of the earth,
“‘that they may multiply on the earth
“and be fruitful and become many on the earth.’
“So Noah went out, together with his sons,
“his wife, and his sons’ wives.
“Every living creature, every creeping animal
“and every flying creature,
“everything that moves on the earth,
“went out of the ark by families.
“Then Noah built an altar to Jehovah
“and took some of all the clean animals
“and of all the clean flying creatures
“and offered burnt offerings on the altar.
“And Jehovah began to smell a pleasing aroma.
“So Jehovah said in his heart:
“‘Never again will I curse the ground
“‘on man’s account,
“‘for the inclination of the heart of man
“‘is bad from his youth up;
“‘and never again will I strike down
“‘every living thing as I have done.
“‘From now on,
“‘the earth will never cease to have
“‘seed-sowing and harvest,
“‘cold and heat,
“‘summer and winter,
and day and night.’”
When the dove didn’t return,
Noah removed part of the roof of the ark.
Now he could see
that much of the land had dried out.
Possibly, he could see
vegetation growing and flourishing
in a way that it hadn’t been possible
in the days before the Flood,
when the earth had been cursed.
Still, Noah waited for Jehovah’s direction.
And then it came, Jehovah’s command:
“Go out of the ark.”
At last!
What a joyful day that must have been!
They’d been in the ark for 370 days.
Picture the family coming out of the ark
—laughing, breathing fresh air,
eager to adjust to their new life.
The animals came out too,
and the family watched
as they dispersed in all directions.
Some they had drawn close to,
but now it was farewell
—a happy farewell.
There were no materialized angels,
no Nephilim, and no wicked people.
How grateful they were to Jehovah!
Noah wasted no time.
He built an altar and sacrificed to Jehovah,
and God expressed his pleasure.
Jehovah assured the family
that he would never again strike down
every living thing.
But he did more than that.
He concluded a covenant
with Noah and his sons
and gave them a sign
that we too can observe.
Let’s read about it at Genesis chapter 9,
starting with verse 8:
“Then God said to Noah and to his sons with him:
“‘I am now establishing my covenant with you
“‘and with your offspring after you,
“‘and with every living creature that is with you,
“‘the birds, the animals,
“‘and all the living creatures of the earth with you,
“‘all those that came out of the ark
“‘—every living creature of the earth.
“‘Yes, I establish my covenant with you:
“‘Never again will all flesh be destroyed
“‘by the waters of a flood,
“and never again will a flood bring the earth to ruin.’
“And God added:
“‘This is the sign of the covenant
“‘that I am making between me and you
“‘and every living creature that is with you,
“‘for all future generations.
“‘I put my rainbow in the cloud,
“‘and it will serve as a sign of the covenant
“‘between me and the earth.
“‘Whenever I bring a cloud over the earth,
“‘then the rainbow will certainly appear in the cloud.
“‘And I will certainly remember my covenant
“‘that I made between me and you
“‘and every living creature of every kind;
“‘and never again will the waters
“‘become a flood to destroy all flesh.
“‘And the rainbow will occur in the cloud,
“‘and I will certainly see it
“‘and remember the everlasting covenant
“‘between God and every living creature
of every kind on the earth.’”
What a magnificent sign Jehovah gave!
Every rainbow would remind
both God and man of his promise.
How Noah’s family must have marveled
to see the colors spanning across the sky
—violet, indigo, blue, green,
yellow, orange, and red!
Never again will a flood deluge the earth.
But Jehovah is not one
to tolerate wickedness forever.
Let’s read what the apostle Peter wrote.
Please turn to 2 Peter 2:5.
The apostle wrote:
“And he [God] did not refrain
“from punishing an ancient world,
“but kept Noah, a preacher of righteousness,
“safe with seven others when he brought a flood
upon a world of ungodly people.”
Today, we live in a world
that resembles the one before the Flood.
There’s violence,
and people do
all sorts of things that Jehovah hates.
People are concerned
with the everyday affairs of life
and take no note of the message of salvation
that we proclaim.
Ridiculers of God’s people mockingly say:
“Where is this promised presence of his?
“Why, . . . all things are continuing exactly
as they were from creation’s beginning.”
They are wrong.
Jehovah acted against wickedness
in the time of Noah,
and He’ll act again.
But, like Noah, the faithful will be saved.
God’s Word assures us:
“Jehovah knows how to rescue
“people of godly devotion out of trial,
“but to reserve unrighteous people
to be destroyed on the day of judgment.”
Jehovah will make the earth a paradise,
just as he originally purposed.
The Paradise will be inhabited
by good people.
There will be no people
who rebel against God.
And what of the rebellious spirit creatures?
When the flood deluged the earth
in Noah’s day,
the rebellious angels left their human bodies
and returned to the spirit realm in disgrace.
However, these demons have continued to exert
an evil influence on humans down to this day.
But when Jehovah acts again,
the demons and their ruler, Satan,
will be put out of action.
The Word of God says this:
“By faith Noah,
“after receiving divine warning
“of things not yet seen,
“showed godly fear and constructed an ark
for the saving of his household.”
Faith moved Noah to obey Jehovah.
As a result,
he and his family survived the Flood.
Noah lived a long life, some 950 years.
But when that faithful man is resurrected,
he’ll have the prospect of living forever.
If we display the faith of Noah
and obey Jehovah,
we too can walk
with Jehovah as our Friend
—and that friendship can last forever!
The Bible account of Noah reminds us
how close we are to the end of this system
and how soon Jehovah will reward our faith.
You will be pleased to know
that the dramatic Bible reading
that you just enjoyed
is available for download today
from jw.org and in the JW Library® app.
Just as Jehovah safeguarded Noah
and his family in the days before the Flood,
He is now safeguarding us.
What can help us stay close to Jehovah
despite any trials we face?
In what ways does he come to our aid?
Please pay close attention
to Brother Kenneth Cook of the Governing Body
as he answers these questions in the talk
“Have Faith and Do Not Doubt.”
We depend on many powerful man-made things
to deliver the items that we need.
For example, a powerful freight train
can climb steep hills
and deliver its freight on time.
A powerful cargo ship can withstand
high seas and deliver its cargo.
But there is a limit
to what man’s ingenuity can do.
When it comes to our most crucial needs,
such as true peace,
real security, and lasting happiness,
humans promise what they
do not have the power to deliver.
Political, religious,
and financial institutions
have proved to be untrustworthy.
With so many promises broken,
we’re not surprised that many people
are skeptical about the future.
But in contrast to such failures,
Jehovah’s promises never fail.
And we are made more powerful
when we trust in his promises.
He always delivers on his word.
Jehovah promises to sustain us
through any trials,
no matter how intense they may become.
Consider Jesus’ example.
No human has faced trials more intense
than what he experienced.
Yet, Jesus had faith that delivered
—powerful faith that carried him through.
With freeness of speech,
Jesus encouraged his followers
to have faith and not to doubt.
For example,
on one occasion while traveling
near Bethany with his disciples,
Jesus used a fig tree
to provide an object lesson
on the need to have faith in God.
The account in Matthew chapter 21
tells us that the fig tree
was barren except for leaves.
In verses 19 and 20, Jesus said to the tree:
“‘Let no fruit come from you ever again.’
And the fig tree withered instantly.”
Now, as a result, the disciples
were amazed and they asked Jesus:
“How is it that the fig tree
withered instantly?”
As we read Jesus’ reply to them
in verses 21 and 22,
please keep in mind that Jesus is providing
an object lesson for them.
So let’s pull out the lesson about faith
as we read verses 21 and 22:
“In answer Jesus said to them:
‘Truly I say to you,
“‘if you have faith and do not doubt,
“‘not only will you do
what I did to the fig tree,
“‘but even if you say to this mountain,
“‘“Be lifted up and thrown into the sea,”
it will happen.
“‘And all the things you ask in prayer,
having faith,
you will receive.’”
That was a powerful object lesson on faith,
especially in view of the trials
that his disciples would soon experience.
But do you see any more
object lessons in this example?
There’s another connection
between what happened to the fig tree
and having faith.
You see, the nation of Israel,
like that fig tree,
had a deceptive appearance.
Although the nation was
in a covenant relationship with God,
it proved to be without faith
and it was barren of good fruitage.
It even rejected God’s own Son.
So by causing
the unproductive fig tree to wither,
Jesus demonstrated
what the end result would be
for those without faith.
To benefit from this object lesson today,
we also need to have faith and not doubt.
In this talk, we will discuss four situations
that show how prayer, study,
and meditation can help us
to rely fully on Jehovah’s promises.
With each situation, we will look
at the challenge we face,
the promise we’ve received,
and our reason for faith in that promise.
Here’s the first situation:
It is when we are tempted.
What is the challenge?
The challenge is to avoid
giving in to temptation.
There are many things that can tempt us
to go down a wrong path
and show a lack of faith.
We could be tempted by immoral desires
that violate God’s laws and principles.
We could be tempted to set
spiritual interests aside
and pursue material things.
We could be tempted to become prideful
and ambitiously try to outdo others.
We must never allow that to happen.
The fact is that there are
many things that could tempt us
to show a lack of faith
and of trust in Jehovah.
So now, there is the challenge;
here is the promise.
Let’s see Jehovah’s promise in his Word.
It is twofold, or two-part,
and we find it at 1 Corinthians 10:13.
As we read it, look for the promise.
Verse 13:
“No temptation has come upon you
except what is common to men.
“But God is faithful,
“and he will not let you be tempted
beyond what you can bear,
“but along with the temptation
he will also make the way out
so that you may be able to endure it.”
What is the promise here?
First, Jehovah will not let us “be tempted
beyond what [we] can bear,” or handle.
Also, Jehovah will help us.
He will “make the way out” for us, it said
—that is, out of any temptation
if we rely on him.
We must have faith and not doubt.
So far, we’ve considered
the challenge and the promise.
Now let’s examine our
reason for faith in that promise.
Our reason for faith is this:
Jehovah knows us better
than we know ourselves,
and his Word says
that we can remain faithful.
At Deuteronomy 30:11,
Jehovah told the Israelites
that what he required of them
was “not too difficult” nor was it
“beyond [their] reach,” he said.
So for good reason,
he expected them to show faith and to obey.
He expects no less of his servants today.
Let’s consider some practical steps
that will help us to resist temptations.
We will list them first,
and then we will look
more closely at two of the steps.
First, pray regularly
for the needed strength.
Second, study and meditate
so as to keep your mind fixed
on Jehovah’s promises.
Third, know your weaknesses.
And fourth, avoid situations
that would increase temptation.
Now let’s look more closely
at steps three and four.
They are the need to know our weaknesses
and how to avoid situations
that cause temptation for us.
We’re going to begin with a chain.
It’s a fact that a chain
is only as strong as its weakest link, true?
Where it is weak
is where it will break first.
Like a chain, we have weaknesses
that others may not see,
but we should know our weaknesses.
Make certain that you know yourself
and that you know
where you are most vulnerable.
When we know our weaknesses,
we know what to guard against.
In other words,
we know where the weak link is.
When we know our weaknesses,
then we’re able to stand “firm in the faith.”
One sister said: “When I face temptation,
I reject it immediately.
“Letting the mind dwell on the possibilities
is what gets you into trouble
in the first place.”
So, again, know your weaknesses
and guard against those weaknesses.
Another important step that we listed
is to avoid situations
that increase temptation.
Stay away from people
whose speech and conduct
make wrongdoing look attractive.
Remove yourself from situations
where you know
you’re going to face temptations.
Surround yourself with friends
who encourage you to do what is right.
Proverbs 22:3 says:
“The shrewd one sees the danger
and conceals himself,
but the inexperienced keep right on going
and suffer the consequences.”
We prove to be shrewd
when we trust that inspired statement
and avoid temptation.
So in review of when we are tempted,
we looked at the challenge, the promise,
and our reason for faith in that promise.
Then we considered
what will help us to succeed,
which included the need to pray regularly
and to study and meditate on God’s Word.
With each of the next three situations,
we will follow the same pattern.
The next situation in which we
must rely on Jehovah’s promise
has to do with when we face opposition.
Here’s the challenge:
Avoid compromising under pressure.
No doubt all of us think at times about how
we would handle various problems
that may eventually confront us.
Such mental exercises can be helpful,
provided that we remember that Jehovah
will always be with us
when we are doing his will,
which brings us to his promise
that Jehovah will give us his holy spirit
so that we can endure opposition.
Jesus is one who trusted in that promise.
He also urged his followers to remain calm
and show trust.
Consider what he said at Luke 12:11, 12.
Now, as we read Jesus’ words,
have in mind that the scribes
and the Pharisees
were putting extreme pressure
on him with many questions
in an effort to use Jesus’ words against him.
Of course, they failed.
And Jesus here gives
assurance that, like him,
we too will succeed when persecution comes
if we have faith and do not doubt.
At Luke 12:11, 12, Jesus said:
“When they bring you
in before public assemblies,
“government officials, and authorities,
“do not become anxious about how
or what you will speak in defense
“or what you will say,
“for the holy spirit will
teach you in that very hour
the things you should say.”
How can we receive the benefits
of this promise when opposition comes?
By listening carefully to Jesus’ words there:
“Do not become anxious.”
Jesus said to remain calm,
“for the holy spirit will teach you.”
Show trust.
Jesus is the greatest example of one
who lived by those very words,
and we can too.
But it takes faith.
So, again, we’ve looked
at the challenge and the promise.
Now let’s examine our reason for faith
in that promise, and it is this:
Jehovah is more powerful
—infinitely more powerful—
than any opposer.
Here are three things all centered on Jehovah
that will help us to face
persecution and opposition.
First, pray regularly, and when doing so,
express your fears to Jehovah
and ask for the “peace of God.”
In the book of Lamentations,
the inspired writer urged God’s people
to “pour out [their] heart like water.”
Water can flow quickly,
and like water flowing out of a large bucket,
we should not hold back
when praying to our heavenly Father,
especially whenever we are faced
with opposition and persecution.
Pour out your heart to him,
and Jehovah promises that he will help you.
We must have faith in Jehovah’s power
to help us and trust in that promise.
As Jesus said: “Do not become anxious.”
Strong faith will help us
to avoid such anxiety.
Second, we are also helped
to face opposition when we study
and meditate on God’s Word.
Daily Bible reading helps to strengthen
our conviction that Jehovah loves us
and that he will never abandon us.
Focus on his tender qualities
as you read his words.
Feel Jehovah’s love for you
in the things that he says and does.
As you meditate on the words
and works of Jehovah,
reflect on your own
experience in his service.
You’ll likely be able to list
many things that our heavenly Father
has done for you
since you started to serve him.
Yes, Bible reading and meditation
draw us closer to Jehovah,
our Source of strength.
And the more your confidence in him grows,
the stronger your bond with him will become
and the stronger your faith
in him will become.
Now, related to what we just mentioned,
a third thing that will help you
when opposition comes
is to reflect on how Jehovah
has helped you through trials in the past,
and that is exactly what David did.
At Psalm 18:6, he said:
“In my distress I called on Jehovah,
“to my God I kept crying for help.
“From his temple he heard my voice,
and my cry to him for help reached his ears.”
So did David recall Jehovah’s help?
Yes, he did.
“He heard my voice,” David said,
“and my cry to him
for help reached his ears.”
David not only remembered what had happened
but he had faith that Jehovah heard him.
David was still putting that blessing to work
because he never forgot
all that Jehovah had done for him.
When you know that Jehovah has helped you
—when you just know it—
never forget it.
We show gratitude when we remember,
and such experiences strengthen us
to face the trials yet ahead of us.
Now, so far we’ve
considered the need for faith
when we are tempted
and when we face opposition.
Now we will again follow
the same pattern with the third situation:
when we are afflicted with illness.
What is the challenge?
The challenge we face when we are
seriously ill is to avoid questioning
whether Jehovah will care for us.
We must continue to remind
ourselves that Jehovah loves us
and that he will never abandon us.
Remember the promise:
Jehovah will sustain
his loyal ones who are sick.
And that promise
is not just a general feeling
that you get from reading his Word.
That promise is a clear statement
found at Psalm 41:3.
We invite you to read it at Psalm 41:3.
But is it a promise to cure us?
Notice what it says:
“Jehovah will sustain him on his sickbed;
during his sickness
you will completely change his bed.”
Did Jehovah use the word “cure” here?
No, he said “sustain.”
“Jehovah will sustain [us].”
The cure will come later.
But his promise to sustain
his servants is a promise that we can trust.
Here is our reason for faith in that promise:
We know that Jehovah has compassion
for those who are disadvantaged
by poor health, among other things.
In verse 1 of that same psalm,
we are assured that Jehovah
will rescue “the lowly one.”
Jehovah makes a similar loving expression
at Isaiah 57:15.
There he says:
“I reside in the high and holy place,
“but also with those
crushed and lowly in spirit,
“to revive the spirit of the lowly [one]
and to revive the heart
of those being crushed.”
“I reside in the . . . holy place,” he said,
“but also with those
crushed and lowly in spirit.”
Jehovah cares deeply for us, doesn’t he?
In his compassion, he draws close
to his faithful ones who are ill.
But while we should have faith
that Jehovah will sustain us
(and that is true, of course,
whenever we face serious illness),
what steps must we take to cope?
Here are three things
that we can do to work along
with Jehovah’s loving support.
First, pray regularly for practical wisdom
to deal with your illness.
James 1:6 says:
“Keep asking in faith, not doubting at all.”
Earlier, Jesus said:
“Have faith and do not doubt.”
One sister with strong faith
saw the need to do her part
when she found out
that she was seriously ill.
She said:
“When I learned that I had
cancer in my lung and colon,
“I thought that I had
just received a death sentence.
“But after I got home
from the doctor, I thought,
“‘OK, it’s not what I expected,
but I have to find a way to deal with this.’”
So, what did she do?
She prayed
—and not just any prayer.
She says: “I never pray, ‘Make me better.’
“I always pray,
‘Help me to be strong
and endure my illness.’”
—beautiful example.
That sister understands
Psalm 41:3, doesn’t she?
If we do not recover from an illness,
we have faith that the cure
is coming in God’s new world.
In the meantime,
we also have faith in Jehovah’s promise
that he will sustain us
through any trial, any illness.
He will “change [our] bed,”
as the verse said,
meaning that Jehovah
will see to it that our sickbed
will not be one of hopelessness.
Rather, we will endure with faith and hope.
Many have found that their
greatest comfort comes from heartfelt prayer
and from reading such
comforting passages in God’s Word.
When we do this,
Jehovah will give us strength
and he will bring
comforting thoughts to our mind.
That brings us to the second thing
that we can do
to work along with Jehovah’s promise
and his loving support,
and it is this: Study and meditate
on Jehovah’s promises
in order to strengthen your conviction
in the new world where you
will have perfect health.
That time is coming,
as Isaiah 33:24 foretells:
“No resident will say: ‘I am sick.’”
But we can meditate
on such wonderful promises
only if we take the time to read them.
So take time to read
a portion of God’s Word every day.
Give close attention to the Psalms
and to what Jesus did
during his earthly ministry.
Such accounts provide
real-life examples not only of coping
but also of godly compassion
for those who are ill.
And we also have such real-life examples
of compassion among us today.
So the third thing that those
who are afflicted with illness can do
is benefit from association
with fellow believers
to the extent possible.
We’ve come to appreciate this even more
after living through a pandemic,
isn’t that true?
One sister who has coped
with serious illness says this:
“Do not isolate yourself.
“Allow friends to help you.
“There may be times when you feel alone,
but don’t isolate yourself.”
That’s wise advice,
and it is Scriptural advice.
Always remember that the love
we see among Jehovah’s people
is just a reflection
of how he feels about us.
After all, he gave us
the ability to love others,
and his people show that godlike love
for one another every day.
So put your faith
in Jehovah’s sustaining power.
Put your faith
in the comfort from the Scriptures
as well as the loving support
of family and friends.
Put your faith in Jehovah’s sure promises,
and hold on to the assurance
that life is worth living,
even when you are afflicted
with a serious illness.
In all that we have considered
about Jehovah’s promises,
we see that faith is the essential quality
that we need to have.
We need faith when we are tempted,
faith when we face opposition,
and faith when we are afflicted
with serious illness.
We also need faith
when we face economic hardship.
After all, we must have certain things
to survive from day to day
and to continue on in our service to Jehovah.
The question is, How well do we cope
when getting the necessities of life
becomes difficult for us?
Food, clothing, shelter,
transportation, and so forth
—you see, when these things
become hard to get,
it can cause anxiety.
That’s a fact.
It can.
And avoiding such anxiety
is a challenge we may face.
If we ever face that challenge,
what must we call to our mind?
Jehovah’s promise.
Jehovah promises that if we
put the Kingdom first,
he will provide the things that we need.
We must have faith in that promise
—strong faith in that promise.
It’s a promise that Jesus
made very clear for us.
God’s Son understood
that in this system of things,
economic hardship would
sometimes befall God’s people.
And he made it a point to include
some comments about this challenge
in his well-known Sermon on the Mount.
But along with the challenge,
he provided Jehovah’s promise.
Please follow along
as we read Matthew chapter 6
and verse 33
—Matthew 6:33.
Jesus lived as a human,
and here’s a point we want to keep in mind
as we get ready to read this verse.
He grew up in a hardworking family.
It may be that acquiring
the necessities of life
did not always come easy for them,
but they trusted in Jehovah,
and they had what they needed to serve him.
So, what Jesus later
said here at Matthew 6:33,
he said as a real person
—a human—
who knew what people faced at times.
So with that context, he had just urged
his listeners to stop being anxious
and to trust in Jehovah’s ability
to help them.
And then he gave the promise in verse 33:
“Keep on, then,” he said, “seeking first
the Kingdom and his righteousness,
“and all these other things
will be added to you.”
The conviction in that statement
“will be added”
stems from the certainty of the promise.
Jehovah cannot lie, and his Son does not lie.
If we put the interests of the Kingdom first,
we will experience the blessings
that come from that promise.
We have many reasons
to have faith in those words.
Consider: Jehovah provides daily
for the needs of plants and of birds.
So how much more
so for his faithful servants!
We know that this is true
not only because the Scriptures tell us so
but also because we see it for ourselves.
At Matthew 6:26-29,
just before urging his disciples
to put the Kingdom first,
Jesus invited them to “observe intently
the birds of heaven.”
Why?
What did he want his disciples to see?
He wanted them to see
how our heavenly Father cares
for those little creatures
—how he looks after them
and sees that they have their daily food.
They have what they need.
Birds do not spend
their days feeling anxious,
and neither should we.
Jesus rhetorically asked:
“Are you not worth more than they are?”
Such lessons remind us
that we should trust Jehovah’s promise
and in his ability and desire to keep it.
We learned from Jesus’ Sermon
on the Mount that real happiness and security
do not depend on material things.
What matters is our friendship
with our heavenly Father.
So there are the lessons.
But in practical terms,
how can you avoid anxiety
over economic hardship?
Remember to pray continually.
When anxiety takes hold of a person,
he or she might overlook things
that they normally would never overlook.
Keep praying,
and have faith in Jehovah’s promise.
He listens to our prayers.
And pray just as Jesus taught us,
not for financial security,
but for our daily needs,
“our bread for this day,” as he said.
And along with prayer,
remember to study and meditate
on God’s Word each day.
This too can be overlooked
when one feels overwhelmed.
Don’t let that happen to you.
Jehovah will see your effort,
and he will bless you for relying on him.
Study and meditate in order
to strengthen your conviction
that Jehovah will take care of you.
He promises to do so.
In all of this,
don’t forget your past blessings.
Just as Jehovah sustained
his people in the past,
reflect on how Jehovah has helped you.
He has not changed.
Use that experience to build up
your faith and your conviction
that Jehovah will go on helping you
through difficult times.
We live in a largely faithless
and skeptical world, isn’t that true?
We need faith, and when we have it,
we must keep it strong.
When we have faith
in Jehovah’s promises and do not doubt,
we are helped to face
whatever may come our way.
We are helped when we are tempted,
when we face opposition,
when we are afflicted with illness,
and when we experience economic hardship.
In these critical last days,
all of us—each one of us—
needs to keep growing in faith.
Cultivate the yearning that Jesus’ apostles
had toward growing in faith.
We can see their desire
in what they said to Jesus
at Luke 17:5
—Luke 17:5.
Please go to that verse,
and we will also read
Jesus’ reply to them in verse 6.
After hearing Jesus warn
about those who caused stumbling,
we read starting in verse 5:
“The apostles said to the Lord:
‘Give us more faith.’
“Then the Lord said: ‘If you had faith
the size of a mustard grain,
“‘you would say to this black mulberry tree,
“‘“Be uprooted and planted in the sea!”
and it would obey you.’”
In other words:
“Have faith and do not doubt,”
he was telling them.
Now, it is extremely unlikely
that you will ever need
to command a black mulberry tree
to uproot itself and be planted in the sea.
So, then, what was Jesus’ point?
It is this: We are powerful by faith.
Challenges that may seem equally impossible
have been overcome,
or defeated, by our faith in God’s power.
Faith helps us to conquer
any temptation that we face,
faith helps us to defeat
any opposition that rises up against us,
faith sustains us through
any illness we may experience,
and faith strengthens us to trust
in Jehovah’s promise to support us
during economic hardship.
In other words, uproot the mulberry tree,
and plant it in the sea.
As we considered in each of those situations,
we reviewed how prayer, study,
and meditation will help us
to stay close to Jehovah,
the One who will grant us more faith.
Pray for it each day.
Imitate examples of faith found in God’s Word
as well as those serving along with us today.
Remain focused on Jehovah
who fulfills all of his promises,
and he will bless your efforts
to have faith and not to doubt.
Thank you, Brother Cook,
for that warm assurance
that Jehovah will always do
what he has promised.
To conclude this session,
we invite you to sing a song
that expresses our need
for Jehovah’s help and our reliance on him.
It’s song number 118,
entitled “Give Us More Faith,”
after which you may have the closing prayer
at your individual locations.
Again, that’s song number 118.